[Website] Add ADBC blog post (#248)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2022-12-31-arrow-adbc.md

limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Arrow community would like to introduce version 1.0.0 of the [Arrow Database Connectivity (ADBC)][adbc] specification.
ADBC is a columnar, minimal-overhead alternative to JDBC/ODBC for analytical applications.
Or in other words: **ADBC is a single API for getting Arrow data in and out of different databases**.

## Motivation

Applications often use API standards like [JDBC][jdbc] and [ODBC][odbc] to work with databases.
That way, they can code to the same API regardless of the underlying database, saving on development time.
Roughly speaking, when an application executes a query with these APIs:

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/ADBCFlow1.svg" width="90%" class="img-responsive" alt="A diagram showing the query execution flow.">
  <figcaption>The query execution flow.</figcaption>
</figure>

1. The application submits a SQL query via the JDBC/ODBC API.
2. The query is passed on to the driver.
3. The driver translates the query to a database-specific protocol and sends it to the database.
4. The database executes the query and returns the result set in a database-specific format.

> 5. The driver translates the result format into the JDBC/ODBC API.

Reviewer: Is this what this means?
```suggestion
5. The driver translates the result into the format required by the JDBC/ODBC API.
```

6. The application iterates over the result rows using the JDBC/ODBC API.

When columnar data comes into play, however, problems arise.
JDBC is a row-oriented API, and while ODBC can support columnar data, the type system and data representation is not a perfect match with Arrow.

> So generally, columnar data must be converted to rows between steps 5 and 6, spending resources without performing "useful" work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So generally, columnar data must be converted to rows in step 5, spending resources without performing "useful" work.
```

This mismatch is problematic for columnar database systems, such as ClickHouse, Dremio, DuckDB, and Google BigQuery.
On the client side, tools such as Apache Spark and pandas would be better off getting columnar data directly, skipping that conversion.
Otherwise, they're leaving performance on the table.
At the same time, that conversion isn't always avoidable.
Row-oriented database systems like PostgreSQL aren't going away, and these clients will still want to consume data from them.

Developers have a few options:

- *Just use JDBC/ODBC*.
  These standards are here to stay, and it makes sense for databases to support them for applications that want them.
  But when both the database and the application are columnar, that means converting data into rows for JDBC/ODBC, only for the client to convert them right back into columns!
  Performance suffers, and developers have to spend time implementing the conversions.

> - *Use JDBC/ODBC to Arrow conversion libraries*.

Reviewer: reads more clearly with hyphens
```suggestion
- *Use JDBC/ODBC-to-Arrow conversion libraries*.
```

Author: thanks!

>   Libraries like [Turbodbc][turbodbc] and [arrow-jdbc][arrow-jdbc] handle row to columnar conversions for clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Libraries like [Turbodbc][turbodbc] and [arrow-jdbc][arrow-jdbc] handle row-to-columnar conversions for clients.
```

  But this doesn't fundamentally solve the problem.
  Unnecessary data conversions are still required.
- *Use vendor-specific protocols*.
  For some databases, applications can use a database-specific protocol or SDK to directly get Arrow data.
  For example, applications could use Dremio via [Arrow Flight SQL][flight-sql].

>   But client applications that want to use multiple database vendors would need to integrate with each of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  But client applications that want to support multiple database vendors would need to integrate with each of them.
```

  (Look at all the [connectors](https://trino.io/docs/current/connector.html) that Trino implements.)
  And databases like PostgreSQL don't offer an option supporting Arrow in the first place.

> So in the status quo, clients must choose between either tedious integration work or leaving performance on the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As is, clients must choose between either tedious integration work or leaving performance on the table. We can make this better.
```

I think this could be punchier as a section ender.

Author: Thanks! Updated the preview.

## Introducing ADBC

ADBC is an Arrow-based, vendor-netural API for interacting with databases.

> Applications that use ADBC just get Arrow data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications that use ADBC receive Arrow data.
```

Reviewer: Or "simply receive" if you want to emphasize that no conversion is necessary.

They don't have to do any conversions themselves, and they don't have to integrate each database's specific SDK.

Just like JDBC/ODBC, underneath the ADBC API are drivers that translate the API for specific databases.

* A driver for an Arrow-native database just passes Arrow data through without conversion.
* A driver for a non-Arrow-native database must convert the data to Arrow.
  This saves the application from doing that, and the driver can optimize the conversion for its database.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/ADBCFlow2.svg" alt="A diagram showing the query execution flow with ADBC." width="90%" class="img-responsive">
  <figcaption>The query execution flow with two different ADBC drivers.</figcaption>
</figure>

> 

Reviewer: Here the numbered list follows the diagram, whereas above, the numbered list precedes the diagram. It'd probably be best to have the order the same in both places.

Author: Updated (diagram precedes list in both places)

1. The application submits a SQL query via the ADBC API.
2. The query is passed on to the ADBC driver.
3. The driver translates the query to a database-specific protocol and sends the query to the database.
4. The database executes the query and returns the result set in a database-specific format, which is ideally Arrow data.
5. If needed: the driver translates the result into Arrow data.
6. The application iterates over batches of Arrow data.

The application only deals with one API, and only works with Arrow data.

> For example, in Python, the ADBC packages offer a familiar [DBAPI 2.0 (PEP 249)][pep-249]-style interface, with extensions to get Arrow data.

Reviewer: This reference to the Python ADBC packages seems abrupt. Add a sentence before giving the context. Maybe like this:
```suggestion
ADBC API and driver implementations are under development. For example, in Python, the ADBC packages offer a familiar [DBAPI 2.0 (PEP 249)][pep-249]-style interface, with extensions to get Arrow data.
```

      <td>JDBC<br>ODBC (typically row-oriented)</td>
      <td>PostgreSQL wire protocol<br>Tabular Data Stream (Microsoft SQL Server)</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

**ADBC doesn't intend to replace JDBC or ODBC in general**.
But for applications that just want bulk columnar data access, ADBC lets them avoid data conversion overhead and tedious integration work.

Similarly, within the Arrow project, ADBC does not replace Flight SQL, but instead *complements* it.
ADBC is an **API** that lets *clients* work with different databases easily.
Meanwhile, Flight SQL is a **wire protocol** that *database servers* can implement to simultaneously support ADBC, [JDBC][flight-sql-jdbc], and ODBC users.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/ADBC.svg"
       alt="ADBC abstracts over protocols and APIs like Flight SQL and JDBC for client applications. Flight SQL provides implementations of APIs like ADBC and JDBC for database servers."
       width="90%" class="img-responsive">
</figure>

## Getting Involved

ADBC works as part of the Arrow ecosystem to "cover the bases" for database interaction:

- Arrow offers a universal columnar data format,

> - Arrow Flight SQL offers a universal server database protocol,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Arrow Flight SQL offers a universal wire protocol for database servers,
```

> - and ADBC offers a universal client database API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- and ADBC offers a universal API for database clients.
```

To start using ADBC, see the [documentation][adbc-docs] for build instructions and a short tutorial.
(A formal release of the packages is still under way.)
If you're interested in learning more or contributing, please reach out on the [mailing list][dev@arrow.apache.org] or on [GitHub Issues][adbc-issues].

ADBC was only possible with the help and involvement of several Arrow community members and projects.
In particular, we would like to thank members of the [DuckDB project][duckdb] and the [R DBI project][dbi], who constructed prototypes based on early revisions of the standard and provided feedback on the design.

> And ADBC builds on existing Arrow projects, including the [Arrow C Data Interface][c-data-interface] and [Nanoarrow][nanoarrow].

Reviewer: We've generally been keeping "nanoarrow" all lowercase, like pandas or dplyr.
```suggestion
And ADBC builds on existing Arrow projects, including the [Arrow C Data Interface][c-data-interface] and [nanoarrow][nanoarrow].
```

limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Arrow community has accepted version 1.0.0 of the [Arrow Database Connectivity (ADBC)][adbc] specification.
ADBC is an API standard for Arrow-based database access.
It defines abstract APIs in C, Go, and Java for performing common database tasks using Arrow data, like executing queries and getting basic metadata.

Just like time-tested [JDBC][jdbc] and [ODBC][odbc], ADBC defines database-independent interaction APIs, and relies on drivers to implement those APIs for particular databases.
It aims to provide a single API that works with Arrow-native protocols, like [Arrow Flight SQL][flight-sql]; vendor-specific APIs that offer Arrow data, such as those offered by ClickHouse or Google BigQuery; and non-columnar protocols and APIs like the PostgreSQL wire format or JDBC.

In other words: **ADBC is a single API for getting Arrow data in and out of databases**.
Underneath, ADBC driver implementations take care of bridging the actual system.
Arrow-native systems can directly pass through data without conversion, while the driver takes care of converting data in other cases, saving the application from doing the work.

## Examples

> *Note: implementations are still under development, separate from the API standard itself. Examples are subject to change.*

Reviewer 3: Maybe?

```suggestion
*Note: implementations are still under development, separate from the API standard itself. Examples are subjected to change.*
```

or 

```suggestion
*Note: implementations are still under development, separate from the API standard itself. Examples can be subjected to change.*
```

Author: It's "subject to change".

Applications can pass queries either as strings (of SQL) or binary blobs (of serialized Substrait plans).

## What about {Flight RPC, Flight SQL, JDBC, ODBC, …}?

ADBC fills a specific niche that related projects do not address. It is both:

- **Arrow-native**: ADBC can pass through Arrow data with no overhead thanks to the [C Data Interface][c-data-interface].
  JDBC is row-oriented, and ODBC has implementation caveats, as discussed, that make it hard to use with Arrow.
- **Vendor-agnostic**: ADBC drivers can implement the API using any underlying protocol, while Flight SQL requires server-side support that may not be easy to add.

Plotted along these axes, we see that ADBC is both vendor-agnostic and Arrow-native, while Flight SQL is vendor-specific, and JDBC/ODBC are row-oriented:

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/ADBCQuadrants.svg"
       alt="ADBC is Arrow-native and database-agnostic, while Flight SQL is Arrow-native and database-specific. JDBC and ODBC are row-oriented and database-agnostic, and wire protocols like Postgres's and SQL Server's are row-oriented and database-specific."
       width="90%" class="img-responsive">

> </figure>

Author: Good point. Since we're talking about databases, how about a table instead? 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/327919/207962602-98df7b4e-babc-466b-97c6-4a06651363b3.png)

**ADBC doesn't intend to replace JDBC or ODBC in general**, but we think ADBC makes more sense for applications that just want bulk columnar data access.

> 

Reviewer 4: This seems almost like the benefits statement: Eg. "ADBC is an alternative to JDBC or ODBC for applications that need efficient bulk columnar data access...." Or even, "...an efficient, columnar alternative to JDBC/ODBC for analytical (data science?) applications."

In response, we've seen a few solutions:

- *Just provide JDBC/ODBC drivers*.
  These standards are here to stay, and it makes sense to provide these interfaces for applications that want them.
  But if both sides are columnar, that means converting data into rows for JDBC/ODBC, only for the client to convert them back into columns!
- *Provide converters from JDBC/ODBC to Arrow*.
  Some examples include [Turbodbc][turbodbc] and [arrow-jdbc][arrow-jdbc].
  This approach reduces the burden on client applications, but doesn't fundamentally solve the problem.
  Unnecessary data conversions are still required.
- *Provide special SDKs*.
  All of the columnar systems listed above do offer ways to get Arrow data, such as via [Arrow Flight SQL][flight-sql].
  But client applications need to spend time to integrate with each of them.
  (Just look at all the [connectors](https://trino.io/docs/current/connector.html) that Trino implements.)
  And not every system offers this option.

ADBC combines the advantages of the latter two solutions under one API.
In other words, ADBC provides a set of API definitions that client applications code to.

> These API definitions are Arrow based.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
These API definitions are Arrow-based.
```

> The application then links to or loads drivers for the actual database, that implement the API definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application then links to or loads drivers for the actual database, which implement the API definitions.
```

ADBC builds on several existing Arrow projects.

- The [Arrow C Data Interface][c-data-interface] provides a cross-language way to pass Arrow data between ADBC implementations and ADBC users.
- [Flight SQL][flight-sql] is used to implement an ADBC driver, making Flight SQL accessible to languages like Python.
- [Nanoarrow][nanoarrow] is used to implement some ADBC drivers, making them lightweight and independent of the core Arrow libraries.

Also, ADBC provides API support for the emerging [Substrait][substrait] specification.
Applications can pass queries either as strings (of SQL) or binary blobs (of serialized Substrait plans).

## What about {Flight RPC, Flight SQL, JDBC, ODBC, …}?

ADBC fills a specific niche that related projects do not address. It is both:

- **Arrow-native**: ADBC can pass through Arrow data with no overhead thanks to the [C Data Interface][c-data-interface].
  JDBC is row-oriented, and ODBC has implementation caveats, as discussed, that make it hard to use with Arrow.
- **Vendor-agnostic**: ADBC drivers can implement the API using any underlying protocol, while Flight SQL requires server-side support that may not be easy to add.

> ADBC is both vendor-agnostic and columnar, while Flight SQL is vendor-specific, and JDBC/ODBC are row-oriented:

Reviewer: This seems to contract the prior assertion that "ODBC can support columnar data"

Author: Yeah, I'm mostly trying to characterize ODBC as "row-oriented, with some columnar capabilities", I'll tweak this

Author: Updated.

Also, tweaked wording below the table to emphasize the API vs protocol distinction behind ADBC/Flight SQL.

<table class="table table-hover" style="table-layout: fixed">
  <caption>Comparing database APIs and protocols</caption>
  <thead class="thead-dark">
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th class="align-top" style="width: 40%" scope="col">Vendor-neutral (database APIs)</th>
      <th class="align-top" style="width: 40%" scope="col">Vendor-specific (database protocols)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Columnar</th>
      <td class="table-success"><strong>ADBC</strong></td>
      <td>Arrow Flight SQL<br>BigQuery Storage gRPC API</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Row-oriented</th>

>       <td>JDBC<br>ODBC</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      <td>JDBC<br>ODBC (typically)</td>
```

See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

The Arrow community would like to introduce version 1.0.0 of the [Arrow Database Connectivity (ADBC)][adbc] specification.
**ADBC aims to be an columnar, minimal-overhead alternative JDBC/ODBC for analytical applications**.
It defines vendor-agnostic and Arrow-based APIs for common database tasks, like executing queries and getting basic metadata.
These APIs are available, either directly or via bindings, in C/C++, Go, Java, Python, Ruby, and soon R.

With ADBC, developers get both the benefits of using columnar Arrow data and having generic API abstractions.
Like [JDBC][jdbc]/[ODBC][odbc], ADBC defines database-independent interaction APIs, and relies on drivers to implement those APIs for particular databases.
ADBC aims to bring all of these together under a single API:

- Vendor-specific Arrow-native protocols, like [Arrow Flight SQL][flight-sql] or those offered by ClickHouse or Google BigQuery;
- Non-columnar protocols, like the PostgreSQL wire format;
- Non-columnar API abstractions, like JDBC/ODBC.

> In other words: **ADBC is a single API for getting Arrow data in and out of databases**.

Author: Right, three classes within a single API. I'll think about rewording this a bit.

    with conn.cursor() as cur:
        cur.execute("SELECT * FROM customer")
        table = cur.fetch_arrow_table()
        # Process the results
```

The ADBC Python packages offer a familiar [DBAPI 2.0 (PEP 249)][pep-249]-style API, along with extensions to get Arrow data.

In Java, we can pull Arrow data out of a JDBC connection.
The ADBC driver takes care of converting the data for the application:

```java
final Map<String, Object> parameters = new HashMap<>();
parameters.put(
    AdbcDriver.PARAM_URL,
    "jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/postgres?user=postgres&password=password");
try (final AdbcDatabase database = JdbcDriver.INSTANCE.open(parameters);
    final AdbcConnection connection = database.connect();
    final AdbcStatement stmt = connection.createStatement()) {
  stmt.setSqlQuery("SELECT * FROM " + tableName);
  try (AdbcStatement.QueryResult queryResult = stmt.executeQuery()) {
    while (queryResult.getReader().loadNextBatch()) {
      // Process the results
    }
  }
}
```

## In More Detail

As mentioned, ADBC is an API standard.
You can read the [C/C++ header][adbc.h], [Go interfaces][adbc-go], and the [Java interfaces][adbc-core] for yourself.

> The project has built several libraries around this standard:

Reviewer 2: How can the project be accessed, is this supposed to be the repo, or...?

- Driver implementations implement the API standard on top of a particular protocol or vendor.
  See the drivers for [libpq (PostgreSQL)][adbc-libpq] and [JDBC][adbc-jdbc].

> - The driver manager library provides an easy way to use multiple drivers from a single program, and also load drivers at runtime if desired.

Reviewer 2: This library sounds incredible -- where can we get it? Should it be mentioned earlier? It sounds like a very impressive feature to me.

This infrastructure is reusable by other drivers/vendors and accessible to other languages.
For example, the Python bindings shown above are actually generic Python bindings for any ADBC driver, courtesy of the driver manager.

ADBC builds on several existing Arrow projects.

- The [Arrow C Data Interface][c-data-interface] provides a cross-language way to pass Arrow data between ADBC implementations and ADBC users.
- [Flight SQL][flight-sql] is used to implement an ADBC driver, making Flight SQL accessible to languages like Python.
- [Nanoarrow][nanoarrow] is used to implement some ADBC drivers, making them lightweight and independent of the core Arrow libraries.

Also, ADBC provides API support for the emerging [Substrait][substrait] specification.

> Applications can pass queries either as strings (of SQL) or binary blobs (of serialized Substrait plans).

Author: I think some people will conversely nit me and say that really the driver just gets text/bytes and it doesn't _have_ to be SQL or Substrait but probably that will be a less common point

> Applications can pass queries either as strings (of SQL) or binary blobs (of serialized Substrait plans).

Reviewer 2: Will it function with anything other than SQL or Substrait?

## What about {Flight RPC, Flight SQL, JDBC, ODBC, …}?

ADBC fills a specific niche that related projects do not address. It is both:

- **Arrow-native**: ADBC can pass through Arrow data with no overhead thanks to the [C Data Interface][c-data-interface].
  JDBC is row-oriented, and ODBC has implementation caveats, as discussed, that make it hard to use with Arrow.
- **Vendor-agnostic**: ADBC drivers can implement the API using any underlying protocol, while Flight SQL requires server-side support that may not be easy to add.

> ADBC is both vendor-agnostic and columnar, while Flight SQL is vendor-specific, and JDBC/ODBC are (generally) row-oriented:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where ADBC fulfills both of these needs, Flight SQL is vendor-specific, and JDBC/ODBC are (generally) row-oriented:
```
This feels a bit cleaner to me, but I also notice that it just restates the bullets above -- maybe it should match the language on the JDBC/ODBC part to directly mention Arrow, or this sentence could be dropped?

<table class="table table-hover" style="table-layout: fixed">
  <caption>Comparing database APIs and protocols</caption>
  <thead class="thead-dark">
    <tr>
      <th></th>
      <th class="align-top" style="width: 40%" scope="col">Vendor-neutral (database APIs)</th>
      <th class="align-top" style="width: 40%" scope="col">Vendor-specific (database protocols)</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>

  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Columnar</th>
      <td class="table-success"><strong>ADBC</strong></td>
      <td>Arrow Flight SQL<br>BigQuery Storage gRPC API</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Row-oriented</th>
      <td>JDBC<br>ODBC (typically row-oriented)</td>
      <td>Postgres wire protocol<br>Tabular Data Stream (Microsoft SQL Server)</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

> **ADBC doesn't intend to replace JDBC or ODBC in general**, but we think ADBC makes more sense for applications that just want bulk columnar data access.

Reviewer 2: Does it make more sense? Why would an application want this? Would the reader already have all this in mind?

Similarly, within the Arrow project, ADBC does not replace Flight SQL, but instead *complements* it.
ADBC gives client applications a uniform **API** to multiple database protocols and APIs—including Flight SQL.

> Meanwhile, Flight SQL gives database servers a single **wire protocol** that can be implemented to simultaneously target ADBC users, [JDBC users][flight-sql-jdbc], and ODBC users.

Author: We could follow up with a short post about these two specifically, though, since I expect it'll be a common question. (Or just update the FAQ.)

## Conclusion/Getting Involved

In summary, ADBC works as part of the Arrow ecosystem to "cover the bases" for database interaction:

- Arrow offers a universal columnar data format,
- [Substrait][substrait] offers a universal query specification,
- ADBC offers a universal client database API,
- and Arrow Flight SQL offers a universal server database protocol.

<figure style="text-align: center;">
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/img/ADBC.svg"
       alt="ADBC abstracts over protocols and APIs like Flight SQL and JDBC for client applications. Flight SQL provides implementations of APIs like ADBC and JDBC for database servers."
       width="90%" class="img-responsive">
</figure>

> To start using ADBC today, see the [repository][adbc] on how to build and install the packages, or look at the [documentation][adbc-docs] for a short tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Does the documentation include build and install instructions? If so, would it be better to point people to the repo for the code, then the docs for how to build, install, and use?
